
COMMANDS LIST :

1.DAN_TURN_ON : Turns the instrument on

2. DAN_TURN_PNG_ON : Turns the Pulsed neutron generator on

3. DAN_TURN_DE_ON : Turns the Detector Element on

4. DAN_TURN_PNG_OFF : Turns the Pulsed neutron generator off

5. DAN_COLLECT_HYD : Give the information about the hydrogen content

6. DAN_TURN_DE_OFF : Turns the Detector Element off

7. DAN_TURN_OFF : Turns the instrument off


Information on Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN) :

The DAN instrument will use the method of neutron-neutron activation analysis in a space application to study the 
abundance and depth distribution of water in the martian subsurface along the path of the MSL rover. DAN consist of 
two elements Detector Element and Pulse Neutron Generator.

Water is thought to be the most likely substance within Mars’ subsurface that contain hydrogen nuclei, 
so the detection of hydrogen in the soil is interpreted to mean the detection of water. Therefore, the neutron and 
gamma-ray data from the GRS suite can be used to produce global maps of water content in a shallow layer (1 m) of 
Mars’ subsurface.

The water content of martian soil from a surface platform, based on measurements of the dynamic albedo of neutrons 
induced by a pulse generator of 14 MeV neutrons. We will use neutron scattering (produced) with a pulse neutron generator) 
in the martian subsurface to provide an estimation of the concentration of hydrogen in the martian soil at depths  0.5 m. 

Analysis of Hydrogen by DETECTOR ELEMENT :

The DAN-DE includes two 3He proportional counters. These counters have a 2-inch diameter and are 65 mm in length 
(40 mm active length) and are filled with 3He gas up to 10 atmospheres of pressure (the final pressure will be fixed 
after physical calibration with the DAN Engineering Model). One of the DAN detectors is surrounded with a cadmium 
enclosure to prevent registration of thermal neutrons and is able to detect neutrons in a broad energy range, 
starting above thermal neutrons up to and including epithermal neutrons. The second detector (without the cadmium shield) 
detects both thermal and epithermal neutrons. 

The DAN-DE digital electronics (based on the ACTEL RTAX series FPGA) also serves as the instrument’s “brain,” which 
supports the telemetry and commanding interface be-tween the DAN instrument and the MSL computer.

Analysis of Hydrogen by PULSE NEUTRON GENERATOR :

The DAN Pulse Neutron Generator (DAN-PNG) is the other key element of the DAN instrument. It is manufactured as a separate 
unit that will be connected to the DAN-DE through an intra-instrument cable.

The DAN-PNG inherits all its major functionality from the industry prototype ING-101 (see Introduction), including its 
neutron tube (with ion source and tritium target) and high-voltage electronics responsible for the generation of 120 kV 
voltage to accelerate D ions inside the neutron tube. 

The DAN-PNG is able to generate neutron pulses with 107 neutrons per pulse at any frequency up to 10 Hz neutrons per pulse 
at any frequency up to 10 Hz.

The DANPNG will emit neutron pulses with a selected frequency and irradiate the martian subsurface to produce a dynamic 
albedo of epithermal and thermal neutrons detected by the DAN-DE in the form of die-away curves. 

This mode will be used during short stops between rover traverses, while parked, and during special inspection activities 
(long-duration measurements at specially selected locations). Short-duration (2 min) measurements will be requested to 
provide a rough estimate of the water distribution with an accuracy of 1%. Long-duration (30 min) measurements will be 
requested to deconvolve the vertical distribution of water with an accuracy 0.1–0.3%.

The current physical parameters of the DAN-PNG (number of neutrons in each pulse, the shape
of neutron pulse, the suggested frequency of pulsing, and the energy of neutron emission) and the DAN-DE 
(detector scheme, detector effective volume, gas pressure) have also been used in the numerical simulations.
